CHAPTER XIX.
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it, and the Sibyl, if Sibyl she
were, was seated snugly enough in an easy chair at the chimney corner. She had on a
red cloak and a black bonnet, or rather a broad brim gypsy hat tied down with a
striped handkerchief under her chin. An extinguished candle stood on the table.
She was bending over the fire and seemed reading in a little black book, like a
book by the light of the blaze. She muttered the words to herself as most old
women do while she read. She did not desist immediately on my entrance. It
appeared she wished to finish a paragraph. I stood on the rug and warmed
my hands, which were rather cold with sitting at a distance from the drawing
room fire. I felt now as composed as ever I did in my life. There was nothing
indeed in the gypsy's appearance to trouble one's calm. She shut her book and
slowly looked up. Her hat brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see as she
raised it that it was a strange one. It looked all brown and black. Elf-locks
bristled out from beneath a white band which passed under her chin and came
half over her cheeks, or rather jaws. Her eyes confronted me at once with a bold
and direct gaze.
Well, and you want your fortune told? She said in a voice as decided as her glance,
as harsh as her features. I don't care about it, mother. You may please
yourself, but I ought to warn you. I have no faith. It's like your impotence to say
so. I expect it of you. I heard it in your step as you crossed the threshold.
Did you? You have a quick ear. I have, and a quick eye, and a quick brain. You need
them all in your trade. I do, especially when I've customers like you to deal
with. Why don't you tremble? I'm not cold. Why don't you turn pale? I am not sick.
Why don't you consult my art? I'm not silly. The old crone knickered a laugh
under her bonnet and bandage. She then drew out a short black pipe, and lighting
it began to smoke. Having indulged a while in this sedative, she raised her
bent body, took the pipe from her lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire,
said very deliberately, You are cold, you are sick, and you are silly. Prove it, I
rejoined. I will, in a few words. You are cold because you are alone. No contact
strikes the fire from you that is in you. You are sick because the best of
things, the highest and sweetest given to man, keeps far away from you. You are
silly because you suffer as you may. You will not beckon it to approach, nor will
you stir one step to meet it where it waits you. She again put her short black
pipe to her lips, and renewed her smoking with vigor. You might say all that to
almost anyone who you knew lived as a solitary dependent in a great house. I
might say it to almost anyone, but would it be true of almost anyone? In my
circumstances? Yes, just so, in your circumstances, but find me another
precisely placed as you are. It would be easy to find you thousands. You could
scarcely find me one. If you knew it, you are peculiarly situated. Very near
happiness, yes, within reach of it. The materials are all prepared. There only
wants a movement to combine them. Chance laid them somewhat apart. Let them be
once approached, and bliss results. I don't understand enigmas. I never could
guess a riddle in my life. If you wish me to speak more plainly, show me your palm.
And I must cross it with silver, I suppose? To be sure. I gave her a shilling.
She put it into an old stocking-foot, which she took out of her pocket, and
having tied it round and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand. I did. She
arched her face to the palm, and poured over it without touching it. It is too
said she. I can make nothing of such a hand as that, almost without lines. Besides,
what is in a palm? Destiny is not written there. I believe you, said I. No, she
continued. It is in the face, on the forehead, about the eyes, in the lines of
the mouth. Kneel and lift up your head. Ah, now you are coming to reality, I said
as I obeyed her. I shall begin to put some faith in you presently. I knelt
within half a yard of her. She stirred the fire so that a ripple of light broke
from the disturbed coal. The glare, however, as she sat, only threw her face
into deeper shadow. Mine, it illumined. I wonder with what feelings you came to me
tonight, she said when she had examined me a while. I wonder what thoughts are
busy in your heart during all the hours you sit in yonder room with the fine
people flitting before you like shapes in a magic lantern, just as little
sympathetic communion passing between you and them as if they were really mere
shadows of human forms and not the actual substance. I feel tired
often, sleepy sometimes, but seldom sad. Then you have some secret hope to boy
you up and please you with whispers of the future? Not I. The utmost I hope is
to save enough money out of my earnings to set up a school some day in a little
house rented by myself. A mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on, and sitting
in that window seat. You see, I know your habits. You have learned them from the
servants. Ah, you think yourself sharp. Well, perhaps I have. To speak truth, I
have an acquaintance with one of them, Mrs. Poole. I started to my feet when I
heard the name. You have, have you? thought I. There is diablerie in the
Don't be alarmed, continued the strange being. She is a safe hand, is Mrs. Poole.
Close and quiet. Anyone may repose confidence in her. But as I was saying,
sitting in that window seat, do you think of nothing but your future school? Have
you no present interest in any of the company who occupy the sofas and chairs
before you? Is there not one face you study, one figure whose movements you
follow with at least curiosity? I like to observe all the faces and all the
figures. But you never single one from the rest? Or it may be two? I do
frequently, when the gestures or looks of a pair seem telling a tale. It amuses me
watch them. What tale do you like best to hear? Oh, I have not much choice. They
generally run on the same theme, courtship, and promise to end in the same
catastrophe, marriage. And do you like that monotonous theme? Positively I don't
care about it. It is nothing to me. Nothing to you? When lady, young and full
of life and health, charming with beauty and endowed with the gifts of rank and
fortune, sits and smiles in the eyes of a gentleman you... I what? You know. And
perhaps think well of. I don't know the gentleman here. I have scarcely
interchanged a syllable with one of them. And as to thinking well of them, I
respectable and stately and middle-aged, and others young, dashing, handsome and
lively. But certainly they are all at liberty to be the recipients of whose
smiles they please, without my feeling disposed to consider the transaction of
any moment to me. You don't know the gentleman here. You have not exchanged a
syllable with one of them. Will you say that of the master of the house? He is
not at home. A profound remark. A most ingenious quibble. He went to Millcote
this morning, and will be back here tonight or tomorrow. Does that
circumstance exclude him from the list of your acquaintance? Blot him, as it were,
out of existence? No, but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester has to do with
the theme you had introduced. I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of
the gentleman, and of late so many smiles have been shed into Mr. Rochester's
eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim. Have you never
remarked that? Mr. Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his guests.
No question about his right, but have you never observed that, of all the tales
told here about matrimony, Mr. Rochester has been favoured with the most lively
and the most continuous? The eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of a
narrator. I said this rather to myself than to the gypsy, whose strange talk,
voice, manner, had by this time wrapped me in a kind of dream. One unexpected
sentence came from her lips after another, till I got involved in a web of
mystification, and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting for weeks by my
watching its workings, and taking record of every pulse. Eagerness of a listener,
repeated she. Yes, Mr. Rochester has sat by the hour, his ear inclined to the
fascinating lips that took such delight in their task of communicating, and Mr.
Rochester was so willing to receive and looked so grateful for the pastime
given him. You have noticed this? Grateful? I cannot remember detecting gratitude in
his face. Detecting? You have analyzed then, and what did you detect if not gratitude?
I said nothing. You have seen love, have you not, and looking forward you have
and beheld his bride happy? Not exactly. Your witch's skill is rather at fault
sometimes. What the devil have you seen then? Never mind. I came here to inquire,
not to confess. Is it known that Mr. Rochester is to be married? Yes, and to
beautiful Miss Ingram. Shortly? Appearances would warrant that conclusion,
and no doubt, though with an audacity that once chastising out of you, you seem
to question it, they will be a superlatively happy pair. He must love such
a handsome, noble, witty, accomplished lady, and probably she loves him, or if
not his purse, at least his purse. I know she considers the Rochester estate
eligible to the last degree, though, God pardon me, I told her something on that
point about an hour ago which made her look wondrous grave. The corners of her
mouth fell half an inch. I would advise her black avest suitor to look out. If
another comes with a longer or clearer rent roll, he's dished. But mother, I did
not come to hear Mr. Rochester's fortune. I came to hear my own, and you have told
me nothing of it. Your fortune is yet doubtful. When I examined your face, one
trait contradicted another. Chance has meted you a measure of happiness, that I
knew it before I came here this evening. She has laid it carefully on one side
for you. I saw her do it. It depends on yourself to stretch out your hand and
take it up, but whether you will do so is the problem I study. Kneel again on the
rug. Don't keep me long. The fire scorches me. I knelt. She did not stoop
towards me, but only gazed leaning back in her chair. She began muttering. The
flame flickers in the eye. The eye shines like dew. It looks soft and full of
feeling. It smiles at my jargon. It is susceptible. Impression follows
impression through its clear sphere. Where it ceases to smile, it is sad. An
unconscious lassitude weighs on the lid. That signifies melancholy resulting from
loneliness. It turns from me. It will not suffer further scrutiny. It seems to deny
by a mocking glance the truth of the discoveries I have already made. To
disown the charge of both sensibility and chagrin, its pride and reserve only
opinion. The eye is favorable. As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter.
It is disposed to impart all that the brain conceives. Though I dare say it would
be silent on much the heart experiences. Mobile and flexible, it was never
intended to be compressed in the eternal silence of solitude. It is a mouth which
should speak much and smile often and have human affection for its interlocutor.
That feature is too propitious. I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the
brow. And that brow professes to say I can live alone if self-respect and
circumstance require me so to do. I need not sell my soul to buy bliss. I have an
inward treasure born with me which can keep me alive if all extraneous delights
should be withheld or offered only at a price I cannot afford to give. The
forehead declares reason sits firm and holds the reins and she will not let the
feelings burst away and hurry her into wild chasms. The passions may rage
furiously like true heathens as they are and the desires may imagine all sorts of
but judgment shall still have the last word in every argument and the casting
vote in every decision. Strong wind, earthquake, shock and fire may pass by
but I shall follow the guiding of that still small voice which interprets the
of conscience.
Well said, forehead. Your declaration shall be respected. I have formed my plans,
right plans I deem them, and in them I have attended to the claims of conscience,
the counsels of reason. I know how soon youth would fade in the bloom parish,
if in the cup of bliss offered but one drag of shame or one flavor of remorse
were detected and I do not want sacrifice, sorrow, disillusion, such as not
my taste. I wish to foster not to blight, to earn gratitude not to ring tears of
blood, no nor of brine. My harvest must be in smiles, in endearments, in sweet.
That will do. I think I rave in a kind of exquisite delirium. I should wish now to
protract this moment ad infinitum but I dare not. So far I have governed myself
thoroughly. I have acted as I inwardly swore I would act but further might try
me beyond my strength. Rise, Miss Eyre, leave me, the play is played out.
Where was I? Did I wake or sleep? Had I been dreaming? Did I dream still? The old
woman's voice had changed, her accent, her gesture, and all were familiar to me
as my own face in a glass, as the speech of my own tongue. I got up but did not
go. I looked, I stirred the fire, and I looked again. But she drew her bonnet and
bandage closer about her face, and again beckoned me to depart. The flame
illuminated, her hand stretched out. Roused now and on the alert for
discoveries, I at once noticed that hand. It was no more the withered limb of an
eld than my own. It was a rounded supple member with smooth fingers
symmetrically turned, a broad ring flashed on the little finger, and stooping
forward, I looked at it and saw a gem I had seen a hundred times before. Again I
looked at the face, which was no longer turned from me. On the contrary, the
bonnet was doffed, the bandage displaced, the head advanced. Well, Jane, do you know
me? asked the familiar voice. Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then, but the
There then, off ye lendings. And Mr. Rochester stepped out of his disguise. Now, sir, what a strange idea.
But well carried out, eh? Don't you think so? With the ladies you must have managed well.
But not with you? You did not act the character of a gypsy with me. What
you have been trying to draw me out. Or in. You have been talking nonsense to make me
talk nonsense. It is scarcely fair, sir.
Do you forgive me, Jane?
I cannot tell till I have thought it all over. If, on reflection, I find I have fallen into
no great absurdity, I shall try to forgive you. But it was not right.
Oh, you have been very correct, very careful, very sensible.
I reflected, and thought on the whole I had. It was a comfort, but indeed, I had been on
my guard almost from the beginning of the interview. Something of masquerade I suspected.
I knew gypsies and fortune-tellers did not express themselves as this seeming old woman
had expressed herself. Besides, I had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to conceal
her features. But my mind had been running on Grace Poole, that living enigma, that mystery
of mysteries as I considered her. I had never thought of Mr. Rochester.
Well, he said, what are you musing about? What does that grave smile signify?
Wonder and self-congratulations, sir. I have your permission to retire now, I suppose?
No, stay a moment, and tell me what the people in the drawing-room yonder are doing.
Discussing the gypsy, I dare say.
Sit down. Let me hear what they said about me.
I had better not stay long, sir. It must be near eleven o'clock. Oh, are you aware, Mr.
Rochester, that a stranger has arrived here since you left this morning?
A stranger? No. Who can it be? I expected no one. Is he gone?
No. He said he had known you long, and that he could take the liberty of installing himself
here till you returned.
The devil he did! Did he give his name?
His name is Mason, sir, and he comes from the West Indies. From Spanish town in Jamaica,
I think. Mr. Rochester was standing near me. He had taken my hand, as if to lead me to
a chair. As I spoke, he gave my wrist a convulsive grip. The smile on his lips froze. Apparently
a spasm caught his breath.
Mason, the West Indies, he said, in the tone one might fancy a speaking automaton to announce
its single words.
Mason, the West Indies, he reiterated, and he went over the syllables three times, growing
in the interval of speaking whiter than ashes. He hardly seemed to know what he was doing.
Do you feel ill, sir? I inquired.
Jane, I've got a blow. I've got a blow, Jane, he staggered. Oh, lean on me, sir.
Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before. Let me have it now.
Yes, sir, yes, and my arm. He sat down and made me sit beside him.
Holding my hand in both his own, he chafed it, gazing on me at the same time with the
most troubled and dreary look.
My little friend, said he, I wish I were in a quiet island with only you, and trouble
and danger and hideous recollections removed from me.
Can I help you, sir? I'd give my life to serve you.
Jane, if aid is wanted, I'll seek it at your hands. I promise you that.
Thank you, sir. Tell me what to do. I'll try at least to do it.
Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-room. They will be at supper there,
and tell me if Mason is with them and what he is doing.
I went. I found all the party in the dining-room at supper, as Mr. Rochester had said. They
were not seated at table. The supper was arranged on the sideboard. Each had taken what he chose,
and then stood about here and there in groups, their plates and glasses in their hands.
Everyone seemed in high glee. Laughter and conversation were general and animated. Mr.
Mason stood near the fire, talking to Colonel and Mrs. Dent, and appeared as merry as any
of them.
I filled a wine-glass. I saw Miss Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so. She thought I was
taking a liberty, I dare say, and I returned to the library. Mr. Rochester's extreme pallor
had disappeared, and he looked once more firm and stern. He took the glass from my hand.
Here is to your health, minister and spirit, he said. He swallowed the contents and returned
it to me.
What are they doing, Jane?
Laughing and talking, sir.
They don't look grave and mysterious, as if they had heard something strange.
Not at all. They are full of jests and gaiety.
And Mason?
He was laughing, too.
If all these people came in a body and spat at me, what would you do, Jane?
Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could. He half-smiled.
But if I were to go to them, and they only looked at me coldly and whispered sneeringly
amongst each other, and then dropped off and left me one by one, what then, would you go
with them?
I rather think not, sir. I should have more pleasure in staying with you.
To comfort me?
Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as I could.
And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to me?
I probably should know nothing about their ban, and if I did, I should care nothing about it.
Then you could dare censure for my sake.
I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved my adherence, as you I am sure do.
Go back now into the room, step quietly up to Mason, and whisper in his ear that Mr.
Rochester has come and wishes to see him. Show him in here, and then leave me.
Yes, sir.
I did his behest. The company all stared at me as I passed straight among them. I sought
Mr. Mason, delivered the message, and proceeded him from the room. I ushered him into the
library, and then I went upstairs.
At a late hour, after I had been in bed some time, I heard the visitors prepare to their
chambers. I distinguished Mr. Rochester's voice, and heard him say,
This way, Mason. This is your room.
He spoke cheerfully. The gay tones set my heart at ease. I was soon asleep.